---
layout: post
title: Test markdown
subtitle: Each post also has a subtitle
gh-repo: daattali/beautiful-jekyll
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
---

Welcome to my first post on thescienceofcoffee.  Today, I wanted to write about several simple and effective tips for improving your daily coffee.  The most common method for brewing coffee is by an automatic drip coffee maker.  Drip coffee is made using a traditional coffee maker (Mr. Coffee, coffee pot from a restaurant etc.) where hot water is automatically dripped on top of ground coffee and through a filter to remove any larger particulates.  There are many different drip coffee systems but in most households they are the ~$20 Mr. Coffee or equivalent brand machine that simply heats up the water and drips it over and through the coffee.  Below are several tips/techniques to make sure your coffee comes out great every day!  (Another popular method for brewing daily coffee is through a single server coffee machine like a Keurig system.  Some of the below tips can be applied to a single cup system but they are intended to be useful for those who use a traditional coffee maker.)

Here is my process for making drip coffee (for one myself only):

Put 4 cups of water in the coffee maker
Place filter in the filter basket
Run hot water through the filter to remove paper particulates (make sure the coffee pot is underneath to catch the water!)
Grind 30 grams of fresh local coffeePlace beans in the filter and turn the coffee maker on
Wait 5-10 minutes and you have delicious/fresh coffee!

The most important step occurs after the coffee has been made:

CLEAN UP!!!!  Do not leave wet beans in your filter or filter basket for an extended period as it will ruin the flavor of subsequent coffee!


Tip 1: Local Coffee Roaster

Purchase your coffee from a local roaster!  You will be impressed with how amazing your daily coffee tastes and you will be supporting a local business.  A typical bag of coffee will be a bit more expensive (and generally only 12 ounces) but once you find a good roaster you will appreciate the improvement to your daily caffeine intake.  After my first bag from a local roaster, I was completely hooked.  I wanted to try all of their coffees and to try all of the other roasters in the area.  In my experience, local roasters always provide the highest quality coffee beans which are roasted in small batches with care and attention.  Generally, local roasters roast every few weeks (depending on popularity) so you will never be purchasing stale beans.  Typically, you will want to grind and brew your coffee within 2-3 weeks of the roasting date to avoid the stale coffee taste.

One other benefit is that some of the local coffee may be sweeter or milder and therefore you may not need to add cream of sugar (if that is your thing!).  This will get rid of those unwanted calories!

Here are some of my favorites in Pittsburgh:

de Fer (https://defer.coffee/)
Commonplace Coffee (https://thecommonplacecoffeehouse.com/)
Steel Valley Roasters (http://www.steelvalleyroasters.com/)
Allegheny Coffee (http://www.alleghenycoffee.com/)
Klvn Coffee Lab (https://www.klvncoffee.com/)

Tip 2: Water

Use the freshest water available to you.  Stop using the water that has been sitting in your coffee maker for days!  Coffee is nearly 99% water and therefore delicious water can play a large factor in the quality of your coffee.  Remember that you do not want to use distilled water because it has all of the minerals removed.  The minerals in your water has been described to me as similar to salt in your food.  If there is no salt in your food, then the food may come out bland or flavorless which can happen with your coffee with no minerals in your water.

If you want to improve your water quality, I would recommend testing out a Third Wave Water Mineral Supplement.  The supplement is very easy to use and adds a bunch to your coffee.

Tip 3: Grind

Grind your own coffee.

If you are new to the coffee hobby, you may not realize how big of a difference grinding your own coffee can be.  Coffee is freshest within 2 hours of grinding it.  Coffee grinders are incredibly affordable and are fun to experiment with.  I recommend purchasing a conical burr grinder for your first grinder.  Java Presse sells a manual grinder( that I have been using for over a year with great success.  Be sure to follow brew guides to determine the grind size for the type of coffee.  For drip coffee, use a medium grind size (which is 8-10 clicks on the Java Presse grinder).For more seasoned coffee drinkers, consider purchasing a Baratza grinder and hone into the perfect grind using Kruve sieves.  

Tip 4: Clean

Clean your coffee maker, grinder, coffee pot, mugs, etc...  I probably am a little bit obsessive about this tip as I clean everything (besides the grinder) immediately after brewing the coffee.  If you use a metal mesh coffee filter, you can immerse it in white vinegar weekly to remove the excess coffee from the filter.  Another option for a mesh coffee filter is to by cleaner made by .

Tip 5: Filters

Screw the environment, use paper coffee filters.  I like to pour hot water through the filter before turning the coffee maker on to remove any excess material and to get rid of the "papery" taste.

In my experience, the metal mesh coffee filters made for repeated use carry the flavor of the old coffee.  I have tried all the tricks including using vinegar to clean them or buying the expensive cleaner made for cleaning mesh and no method seems to work for more than one brew.

Tip 6: Storage

Store your coffee beans in a cool, dry, and dark location.  If you want to splurge, try purchasing a container that has a carbon dioxide filter which will keep your coffee fresher for longer.

Tip 7: Temperature

Instead of pouring your coffee into an open mug, try pouring your hot coffee into an insulated mug.  Zojirushi makes an affordable option that will keep your coffee hot all day.  It is surprising how much different a hot cup of coffee tastes compared to a cooler cup from the same brew.

Be willing to try out new methods!

If you like a particular type of coffee, try out different methods of brewing and you might enjoy your coffee even more!  A V60 pour over system is very cheap and is my favorite method for brewing coffee.  The V60 allows for you to have control of most of the variables with regard to brewing including pour speed, volume of coffee, temperature of water, steep time, drip time, 
